# Operating Systems Weekly Review 13

## 1.  Definitions and Short Answers

1. In terms of I/O systems,  
- What is a **port** of a device?  

> A port of a device refers to the physical or virtual connection interface through which a device can communicate with a computer or I/O devices.  

- What is a **bus**?  

> A bus refers to a communication pathway or channel of wires through which data and control signals are transferred between various hardware components by connecting ports.  

- What is a **daisy chain**?  

> Daisy-chaning is a method of connecting multiple devices in a serial or linear fashion, where one device is connected to the next, forming a chain. This allows seeveral devicees to be connected to a single host using a single port on the host adapter.  

- What does a **controller** do?  

> A controller refers to a hardware component responsible for managing and controlling the operations of a specific I/O device. It contains its own processor, microcode, memory, and bus controller.   

2. What are four kinds of **device registers** that need to be accessed by the host for the following operations?  
- How does a host receive data?  

> The host will read from the data-in registers to receive data.  

- How does a host send data?  

> The host will write into the data-out registers to send data.  

- How does a host find the status or error of a device?  

> The host will read from the status registers to find out about the I/O status, error numbers, etc.   

- How does a host change settings on a device?  

> The host will modify the control registers to change settings of the device (e.g. full- or half-duplex, parity, baud rate, etc.).  

3. If a processor supports **I/O instructions**, what kind of I/O is it called?  

> An I/O instruction that is supported by the processor is called a direct I/O instruction.  

4. If a processor does not support I/O instructions, can it perform I/O?  If so, what is it called, and what kind of instruction does it use to perform I/O?  Or if not, why not?  

> If a processor does not support I/O instruction, it can perform I/O by mapping device-control registers into the memory address space of the CPU. This is called memory-mapped I/O. The instructions used to perform the I/O are none other than the load and store instructions, accessing the device data and command registers.  

5. Does the processor in a personal computer "see" the PCI or PCIe bus directly?  If not, what does it have to go through?  

> The processor cannot directly access the PCI or the PCIe bus directly. It can be accessed through the interface of the bridge. A bridge (also known as the northbridge) is a hardware component connected directly to the CPU via front-side bus (FSB) to handle high-performance tasks (e.g. RAM memory and PCIe).  

6. How is a hard drive with a Serial AT Attachment (SATA) interface connected to a PC with a PCIe bus?  

> A hard drive with a Serial AT Attachment interface can utilize the Serial-Attached SCSI controller to connect to a PC with a PCIe bus.  

7. How is a USB keyboard connected to a PC with a PCIe bus?  

> A USB keyboard can connect to a expansion bus. An expansion bus is a type of bus that is specifically designed for connecting and communicating with periphwral devices and expansion cards. It has an expansion bus controller that connects to the PCIe bus of the CPU.  

8. Is **polling** more suitable for slow or fast devices? Why?  

> Polling more suitable for fast devices, because it has much lower overhead compared to interrupts, and can occur in three instruction cycles (read status, logical-and to extract status bit, and jump if not zero).   

9. Can polling be made more efficient by context switching to another process between two status checks?  What potential problems may happen?  

> Polling can be made more efficient by context switching to another process between the status checks. However, this risks missing a data if its data cycle has passed and the value is overwritten or loss. This happens because context switching requires saving and restoring register states, taking much time.  

10. What is the meaning of **interrupt chaining**? What is a good reason for it?  

> In practice, some computers have more I/O devices than the address elements in the interrupt vector. I/O pins are precious resources in a CPU. Interrupt chaining uses the starting address of a link list data structure, instead of an interrupt vector. When an interrupt is raised, the handlers on the corresponding list are called sequentially until one is found to service the request. It is a compromise between the overhead of a huge interrupt vector table (which may cause a huge overhead) and the inefficiency of dispatching to a single interrupt handler.  

11. What are examples of **exceptions** that an OS handles? What kind of mechanism is used for an OS to handle an exception?  

> Examples of exceptions that are handled by an operating system are divide by zero, memory access violation, insufficient privilege, page fault, etc. A trap is used to trigger kernel for system calls. When a trap occurs, the CPU transfers control to an exception handler specified by the operating system.  

12. What is the meaning of **split interrupt management**? What is the reason for it?  

> Split interrupt management is a technique used to divide the workload of an interrupt into two stages: First-Level Interrupt Handler (FLIH) and Second-Level Interrupt Handler (SLIH). The First-Level Interrupt Handler involves the actual ISR to do I/O, while the Second-Level Interrupt Handler (SLIH) involves the separately scheduled routine to process the data (without I/O) for the operating system, outside the ISR. Split interrupt management is mainly to reduce the amount of time spent in the ISR.  

13. When a DMA controller and a processor both have to access the main memory, what happens? Which one gets priority? Or can both access memory simultaneously? Does it slow down the CPU? Does the DMA controller update the processor's data cache?  

> When a DMA controller and a processor attempts to access the main memory at the same time, the DMA must yield control to the CPU, who has the higher priority.  
> \
> DMA can potentially slow down the CPU if the CPU attempts to access the main memory when an I/O operation or bus transaction by the DMA is on-going. Furthermore, DMA can lead to cache coherency problem as it does not update the cache. However, this can be solved by using the bus-snooping tehcnique where the cache controller invalidates the cache content if an external write occurs.  

14. Which of the following Unix calls are for which types of devices?

| API | Device (Block of Character) | Synchronous, Asynchronous, or Non-blocking |  
| :-: | :-: | :-: |
| `read()` | Block Device | Blocking or Non-blocking |
| `write()` | Block Device | Blocking or Non-blocking |
| `seek()` | Block Device | Non-blocking |
| `get()` | Character Device | |
| `put()` | Character Device | |
| `select()` | | Non-blocking |

15. What is the purpose of `ioctl()`?  

> `ioctl()`, which stands for 'I/O Control' in UNIX-like systems,  is a system call that provides a general-purpose mechansim for controlling and configuring various device-specific or file-specific operations that are not covered by other standard system calls. It allows applications to communicate with device drivers to perform actions or retrieve information that may not be achievable through standard read and write operations.  

16. What is the meaning of **vectored I/O**, and why is it a good idea?  

> Vectored I/O is an array of command that allows one sytem call to perform multiple I/O operations. This is preferrable to multiple individual I/O calls which may involve multiple system call overhead and switching.  

17. Does every I/O system call cause a device driver to be invoked? Why or why not?  

> Not every I/O system call will cause a device driver to be invoked. In the case of an input I/O system call, if the data is already available in the buffer cache, then the data are immediately returned to the process and the I/O request is completed without invoking the device driver.  

18. Where are the metadata such as file name of a file stored and where is it kept?  

> The metadata (including the file attributes, checksums, etc.) are stored in the directory structure , a registry (Windows), and the metadata file, maintained in the disk.  

19. What is the file pointer and what are different ways it can be moved?  

> File pointer is a pointer to the last read or write location in file. It can be repositioned using the `seek()` function call.  

20. What does `truncate()` do and why is it a better idea than `delete()` and (re-)`create` the file?  

> `truncate()` is a API call that writes over a given file and updates its attributes. This is much more efficient than invoking `delete()` and `create()`, because it reuses the existing records and attributes and saves the work of reallocating the needed space.  

21. Is it a good idea for an OS to define the formats for most types of files? Why or why not?  

> It is a bad idea for an operating system to define the format or file structure for most types of files, because the operating system can get complicated for no good reason. It is better for the operating system to interpret files as raw bytes and leave the interpretation to the application programs.  