# Operating Systems Weekly Review 12  

## 1. Definitions and Short Answers  

1. Look at the figure at Page 7 and name the parts of a disk (a - h) and the motions (i - j).  

> (a): Track  
> (b): Sector  
> (c): Cylinder  
> (d): Platter  
> (e): Spindle  
> (f): Head  
> (g): Arm  
> (h): Arm assembly  
> (i): Rotation  
> (j): Seek  

2. When accessing data on a magnetic disk,  
- What is the **rotational latency**?  

> The rotational latency is the time for the spindle to rotate to the desired sector in a given track. The average latency is half of the maximum latency.  

- What is the **seek time**?  

> The seek time is the time for the disk arm to move to the desired cylinder. The average seek time is one-third of the tracks.  

- What is the **positioning time**?  

> The positioning time is the time for the disk to move to the desired track and the desired cylinder.  

- What is another word for the positioning time?  

> The positioning time is also known as the random acceess time.  

- What are the two components of positioning time in magnetic disk access?  

> The spindle and the arm are the two components of positioning time in magnetic disk access. The positioning time is the sum of the positioning time and the seek time.  

3. What is the difference between a cylinder and a track?  

> A cylinder is the set of tracks on all platters at given arm position (or radius). Meanwhile, a track is concentric rings on a given platter. It is divided into multiple sectors.  

4. For flash memory terminology, assume NAND flash,  
- What is the minimum unit of reading?  

> A page is thhe minimum unit of reading.  

- What is the minimum unit of writing?  

> A page is the minimum unit of writing. Note that writing is only limited to changing 1 bit to 0 bit.  

- What is a block?  

> A block is the minimum erase unit, containing several pages.  

- What happens during an erase?  

> An erase sets all bits in a block to 1 bit.  

- If you have to modify one byte, what are the steps involved?  

> If the modification of one byte involves changing a 0 bit to 1 bit, then the steps involved are:    
> 1. Copy the entire block containing the modified byte to memory.  
> 2. Erase the block.  
> 3. Modify the byte in memory.  
> 4. Write the block back.  
> \
> If the modification of one byte does not involve changing a 1 bit to 0 bit, then the step involved is simply write the new byte into the page containing the modified byte to memory.  

5. What is **wear-leveling**, and why is it important for flash memory?  

> Wear-leveling is a technique used in flash memory based storage devices to distribute data and write/erase cycles evenly across the memory cells. This process aims to extend the lifespan of the storage medium by preventing certain memory cells from wearing out prematurely due to repeated write and erase operations.  
> \
> Wear-leveling is a particularly important technique because flash memory cells have a limited number of write and erase cycles before they wear out and become unreliable. Wear leveling ensures that all memory blocks are used uniformly, extending the overall lifespan of the storage device.  

6. What is the primary action that an OS can schedule to improve the performance of a hard disk drive?  

> The operating system cannot alter the rotational speed or seek speed, the device controller manages this. The primary action of an operating system to optimize the performance of a hard disk drive is limited to scheduling the memory access to minimize the seek time.  

7. Of the different disk scheduling algorithms,  
- Is FIFO in general a good policy for HDD? for SSD?  

> First-In-First-Out (FIFO) scheduling is generally not a good policy for HDD, but it works for SSD.  

- Is STSF in general a good policy for HDD?  What kind of problem does it have? What about for SSD?  

> Shortest-Seek-Time-First (SSTF) scheduling is generally good policy and is commonly used for HDD due to its intuitive idea. However, statistically it favors middle cylinder over innermost and outermost cylinders, causing starvation of some requests. SSD has no seek time, thus STSF loses its meaning.  

- What is the difference between SCAN and C-SCAN?  

> SCAN scheduling, also known as elevator scheduling, is a disk scheduling algorithm used to optimize the movement of the disk's read/write head to minimize seek time and improve overall disk performance. In SCAN,  
> 1. The disk arm starts at one end of the disk and begins servicing requests in that direction.  
> 2. As it services requests in the current direction, it continues moving to the end of the disk in that direction.  
> 3. When all requests in the current direction have been serviced, the disk arm changes its direction and starts servicing in the opposite direction.  
> 4. The process repeats until all requests have been serviced.  
> \
> Meanwhile in C-SCAN scheduling, the main difference with SCAN is that when the head reaches the end of the disk, the head immediately wraps from the beginning and start. One advantage over SCAN is that it provides a more uniform wait time for memory reference than SCAN. Both SCAN and C-SCAN avoid starvation of requests.  

- What is the difference between SCAN and LOOK?  

> The main difference between SCAN and LOOK schedulings is that in LOOK, instead of the head moving to the two extreme ends of the disk, it goes only as far as the last request in each direction. When it reaches the furthest request in its direction, it switches its direction.  

- Why does SCAN have more predictable behavior than LOOK?  

> SCAN has more predictable behavior because it always scans the entire disk surface from one end to the other, or vice versa. This means that it serves requests in a strict, deterministic order, either from the innermost track to the outermost or vice versa. LOOK, on the other hand, can have less predictable behavior. Instead of scanning the entire disk, LOOK scans only until it finds the last request in its current direction and then reverses direction. This means it may skip over some tracks or requests in comparison to SCAN.  

8. If NVM scheduling does not need to consider rotation or seek time, what does it need to consider?  

> It needs to minimize write, garbage collection, wear-leveling, and write amplification.  

9. What is a **spare sector**?  

> A spare sector is an area on a computer hard disk or storage device that is reserved for use as a backup in case of defective sectors on the disk. Spare sectors are not part of the regular storage capacity that users can access or utilize for data storage. Instead, they serve a specific purpose related to data reliability and fault tolerance.  

10. What is **sector-slipping**?  

> Sector slipping is an optimization technique that shifts sector contents so the spare preserves the contiguity of the contents. Its main purpose is to reduce seek time in the future if these sectors are used sequentially.  

11. Can a regular file system be used for swap space? What are the advantages and disadvantages?   

> A regular file system can be used for swap space. Its advantages are:  
> 1. Flexibility: you can create and resize the swap file as needed without repartitioning the storage devices.  
> 2. Dynamic allocation: swap files can be dynamically allocated and released as memory demands change, prividing more efficient use of storage resources compared to a fixed-size swap partition.  
> \
> Meanwhile, its disadvantage is performance overhead: swap files may introduce a slight performance overhead compared to dedicated swap partitions. This is due to the overhead involved in file management (managing the metadata).  

12. What is a **swap partition**, and why is it a good idea?  

> A swap partition is a dedicated section of a computer's hard drive or SSD that is specifically reserved for the use to store paged out virtual memory. Its advantages are:  
> 1. A swap partition effectively increases the available memory capacity of a coputer. When the physical RAM is insufficient to handle all the active processes and data, the operating system can use the swap space to temporarily store less freqently accessed data and swap it in and out of memory as needed.  
> 2. Swap partitions are crucial for the functionality of hibernation. When a computer hibernates, the contents of the memory are saved to the swap space, allowing the system to resume its state when powered on again.  

13. how do you pronounce SCSI?  

> Small Computer System Interface is often abbreviated as SCSI, pronounced as 'skuzzy.'  

14. What does **RAID** stand for?  

> Redundant Array of Independent Disks is often abbreviated as RAID.  

15. How can RAID achieve higher reliability?  

> RAID achieves reliability by using redundant copies of stored data.  

16. How can RAID achieve higher disk performance? In what metric?  

> RAID achieves higher disk performance in terms of throughput. RAID uses striping, which splits the data across multiple parallel drives and further allows data parallelism. Successive memory references can access data quicker through parallel access to the disks.  

17. What is the meaning of the following about disks?  
- **Mean time to failure**  

> Mean time to failure (abbreviated as MTTF) is a measure of the expected time between the initial use of a device and its first failure, usually expressed in hours.  

- **Mean time to repair**, and is it related to mean time to failure?  

> Mean time to repair is a measure of the expected time it takes to repair a failed system or component and restore it to normal operation after a failure has occurred, also usually expressed in hours. It is not related to the mean time to failure.  

- **Mean time to data loss**  

> Mean time to data loss is a measure of the expected time until the mirrored disks failing independently, usuaally expressed in hours.  

18. What is the meaning of  
- **Mirroring**?  

> Mirroring is a data redundancy technique that involves creatign an exact copy (or mirror) of the data on one drive onto another drive. Mirroring provides redundancy and fault tolerance, making it a valuable strategy for data protection in storage systems.   

- **Data striping**?  Is it related to mirroring?  

> Data striping is a technique used to distribute data into small stripes across multiple drives, allowing parallel access. Data striping is orthogonal to mirroring.  

- What is the difference between **bit-level striping** and **block-level striping**?  which is more common?  

> With bit-level striping, data is divided into individual bits, and each bit is distributed across the drives in RAID array. Meanwhile, with block-level striping, data is divided into fixed-size blocks or sectors, and each block is distributed across the drives. Block-level striping is more common due to its simplicity.   

- What is the meaning of **striped mirror**? **mirrored stripes**?  Which one is a better choice?  

> RAID 1 + 0 or RAID 10 uses striped mirrors:    
> Data is first mirrored, meaning that each piece of data is duplicated onto another drive. After mirroring, the mirrored sets are striped together. RAID 1 + 0 provide excellent fault tolerance because if one drive in a mirrored pair fails, the data is still accessible from the other drive in that pair.  
> \
> Meanwhile, RAID 0 + 1 or RAID 01 uses mirrored stripes:    
> Data is first striped across drives. After striping, each stripe set is mirrored. However, RAID 0 + 1 is less fault-tolerant than RAID 1 + 0 because if a drive in one of the stripe set fails, all data in that stripe is at risk. In RAID 1 + 0, the failure of one drive in a mirrored pair does not effect the other pair.  